Safe copying of files and partitions.

Idea:

A main problem with damaged storage hardware is, that once you get an
unrecoverable IO error further reading from the file / device often fails until
the file has been closed and re-opened.

The normal copy tools like cat, cp or dd do not allow creation of an image file
from a disk or CD-ROM once reading of a sector failed.

Safecopy tries to get as much data from the source as possible, even resorting
to device specific low level operations if applicable.

This is achieved by identifying problematic or damaged areas, skipping over
them and continuing reading afterwards. The corresponding area in the
destination file is either skipped (on initial creation that means padded with
zeros) or deliberately filled with a recognizable pattern to later find
affected files on a corrupted device.
Safecopy uses an incremental algorithm to identify the exact beginning and end
of bad areas, allowing the user to trade minimum accesses to bad areas for
thorough data resurrection.
Multiple passes over the same file are possible, to first retrieve as much data
from a device as possible with minimum harm, and then trying to retrieve some
of the remaining data with increasingly aggressive read attempts.

For this to work, the source device or file has to be seekable.  For unseekable
devices (like tapes) you can try to use an external script to execute a
controlled skip over the damaged part for you.
(For example by using "mt seek" and "mt tell" on an SCSI tape device)
See the "-S <seekscript>" parameter for details.

Performance and success of this tool depend extremely on the device driver,
firmware and underlying hardware.

Currently safecopy supports RAW access to CDROM drives to read data directly of
a CD, bypassing some driver dependant error correction. This can speed up data
retrieval from CDs and reduce system load during recovery, as well as sometimes
increase the success rate. Safecopy uses the disc status syscall to determine
sector size and addressing of CDs. This fails on mixed-mode or multi-session
CDs, since the sector layout can change within the disk, but would still work
on the the big majority of disks. Other disks can still be recovered using
normal high level data access. Safecopy auto-detects the disk type involved
when first attempting low level access.

Some CD/DVD drives are known to cause the ATAPI bus to crash on errors, causing
the device driver to freeze for times up to and beyond a minute per error. Try
to avoid using such drives for media recovery. Using safecopys low level access
features might help under some circumstances.

Some drives can read bad media better than others. Be sure to attempt data
recovery of CDs and DVDs on several different drives and computers.
You can use safecopys incremental recovery feature to read previously
unreadable sectors only.

Different use cases:

	How do I...

- resurrect a file from a mounted but damaged media, that copy will fail on:
	safecopy /path/to/problemfile ~/saved-file

- create an filesystem image of a damaged disk/cdrom:
	safecopy /dev/device ~/diskimage

- resurrect data as thoroughly as possible?
	(assuming a physical block size of 512 bytes)
	safecopy source dest -b 512 -f 512 -r 512 -R 8 -Z 2
	(assuming logical misalignment of blocks to sectors)
	safecopy source dest -b 512 -f 512 -r 1 -R 8 -Z 2

- resurrect data as fast as possible, or
- resurrect data with low risk of damaging the media further:
	(you can use even higher values for -f and -r)
	safecopy source dest -f 65536 -r 16384 -R 0 -Z 0

- resurrect some data fast, then read more data thoroughly later:
	(assuming a physical sector size of 512 bytes)
	safecopy source dest -b 512 -f 65536 -r 16384 -R 0 -Z 0 -o badblockfile
	safecopy source dest -b 512 -f 512 -r 512 -R 8 -Z 2 -I badblockfile

- utilize some friends CD-ROM drives to complete the data from my damaged CD:
	safecopy /dev/mydrive imagefile <someoptions> -b <myblocksize> \
		-o myblockfile;
	safecopy /dev/otherdrive imagefile <someoptions> -b <otherblocksize> \
		-I myblockfile -i <myblocksize> -o otherblockfile;
	safecopy /dev/anotherdrive imagefile <someoptions> \
		-b <anotherblocksize> -I otherblockfile -i <otherblocksize>

- interrupt and later resume a data rescue operation:
	safecopy source dest
	<CTRL+C> (safecopy aborts)
	safecopy source dest -I /dev/null

- interrupt and later resume a data rescue operation with correct
  badblocks output:
	safecopy source dest <options> -o badblockfile
	<CTRL+C> (safecopy aborts)
	mv badblockfile savedbadblockfile
	safecopy source dest -I /dev/null -o badblockfile
	cat badblockfile >>savedbadblockfile

- find the corrupted files on a partially successful rescued file system:
	safecopy /dev/filesystem image -M CoRrUpTeD
	fsck image
	mount -o loop image /mnt/mountpoint
	grep -R /mnt/mountpoint "CoRrUpTeD"
  (hint: this might not find all affected files if the unreadable
   parts are smaller in size than your marker string)

- exclude the previously known badblocks list of a filesystem from
  filesystem image creation:
  	dumpe2fs -b /dev/filesystem >badblocklist
	safecopy /dev/filesystem image \
		-X badblocklist -x <blocksize of your fs>

- create an image of a device that starts at X and is Y in size:
	safecopy /dev/filesystem -b <bsize> -s <X/bsize> -l <Y/bsize>

- combine two partial images of rescued data without access to the actual
  (damaged) source data:
	(This is a bit tricky. You need to get badblocks lists for both files
	somehow to make safecopy know where the missing data is. If you used
	the -M (mark) feature you might be able to automatically compute these,
	however this feature is not provided by safecopy. Lets assume you have
	two badblocks files.
	you have:	image1.dat
			image1.badblocks (blocksize1)
			image2.dat
			image2.badblocks (blocksize2)
	The file size of image1 needs to be greater or equal to that of image2.
	(If not, swap them)
	)

	cp image2.dat combined.dat
	safecopy image1.dat combined.dat -I image2.badblocks -i blocksize2 \
		-X image1.badblocks -x blocksize1

	(This gets you the combined data, but no output badblocklist.
	The resulting badblocks list would be the badblocks that are
		a: in both badblocks lists, or
		b: in image1.badblocks and beyond the file size of image2
	It should be reasonably easy to solve this logic in a short shell
	script. One day this might be shipped with safecopy, until then
	consider this your chance to contribute to a random open source
	project.)

- rescue data of a tape device:
	If the tape device driver supports lseek(), treat it as any file,
	otherwise utilize the "-S" option of safecopy with a to be
	self-written script to skip over the bad blocks.
	(for example using "mt seek")
	Make sure your tape device doesn't auto-rewind on close.
	Send me feedback if you had any luck doing so, so I can update
	this documentation.

FAQ:
    Q:	Why create this tool if there already is something like dd-rescue and
	other tools for that purpose?
    A:  Because I didn't know of dd(-)rescue when I started, and I felt like
	it. Also I think safecopy suits the needs of a user in data loss peril
	better doe to more readable output and more understandable options than
	some of the other tools. (Then again I am biased. Compare them
	yourself.) Meanwhile safecopy supports low level features other tools
	don't.

    Q:	What exactly does the -Z option do?
    A:	Remember back in MS-DOS times when a floppy would make a "neek nark"
    	sound 3 times every time when running into a read error?
	This happened when the BIOS or DOS disk driver moved the IO head
	to its boundaries to possibly correct small cylinder misalignment,
	before it tried again.
	Linux doesn't do that by default, neither do common CDROM drives or
	drivers.  Nevertheless forcing this behaviour can increase your
	chance of reading bad sectors from a CD __BIG__ time.
	(Unlike floppies where it usually has little effect)

    Q:	Whats my best chance to resurrect a CD that has become unreadable?
    A:	Try making a backup image on many different computers and drives.
	The abilities to read from bad media vary extremely. I have a 6 year
	old Lite On CDRW drive, that even reads deeply and purposely scratched
	CDs (as in with my key, to make it unreadable) flawlessly. A CDRW drive
	of the same age at work doesn't read any data from that part of the CD
	at all, while most DVD and combo drives have bad blocks every couple
	hundred bytes.
	Make full use of safecopys RAW access features if applicable.
	(-L 2 option)
	As a general guideline:
	   -CDRW drives usually do better than read-only CD drives.
	   -CD only drives sometimes do better on CDs than DVD drives.
	   -PC drives are sometimes better than laptop ones.
	   -A drive with a clean lens does better than a dirtball.
	   -Cleaning up CDs helps.
	   -Unless you use chemicals.

    Q:	Whats my best chance to resurrect a floppy that became unreadable?
    A:	Again try different floppy drives. Keep in mind that it might be
	easier to further damage data on a bad floppy than on a CD.
	(Don't overdo read attempts)

    Q:	What about BlueRay/HDDVD disks?
    A:	Hell if I knew, but generally they should be similar to DVDs.
	It probably depends how the drives firmware acts up.

    Q:  My hard drive suddenly has many bad sectors, what should I do?
    A:  Avoid accessing bad areas as much as possible to prevent further
	damage, while rescuing the still good data.
	Accessing bad sectors will make the drive perform lots of error
	recovery in its own, leading to lots of physical movement,
	and potentially lockdown of more disk areas by the firmware.
	You could use smartmontools to check drive error statistic and
	details about whats wrong / internal error logs.
	If you have a list of affected blocks/sectors, write a badblocks file
	manually and use the -X option to prevent safecopy from accessing them
	altogether at first. (Syslog may list them, too)
	Then slowly do incremental recovery, start with a high fault skip (-f)
	and resolution (-r), set retry (-R) and Head recalibration (-Z) to 0.
	(Don't set the resolution lower than physical sector size if your
	driver does correct sector alignments.)
	Then decrease resolution and fault skip down to physical block size,
	increase the retry factor and at last try to add the -Z factor.
	(It probably won't help much on hard disks but its worth a try)
	If your drive stops responding, reboot, let it cool down for a while
	if necessary.
	(I heard from people who used ice-packs successfully as a last resort)

	!!! If the data is really important, go to a professional data recovery
	!!! specialist right away, before doing further damage to the drive

Safecopy 1.2 by CorvusCorax
Usage: safecopy [options] <source> <target>
Options:
	-b <bytes> : Blocksize in bytes for default read operations.
	             Set this to the physical sectorsize of your media.
	             Default: Driver blocksize of input device,
	                      if determinable, otherwise 4096
	-f <bytes> : Blocksize in bytes when skipping over badblocks.
	             Higher settings put less strain on your hardware,
	             But you might miss good areas in between two bad ones.
	             Default: Blocksize as in -b times 16
	-r <bytes> : Resolution in bytes when searching for the exact
	             beginning or end of a bad area.
	             If you read data directly from a device there is no
	             need to set this lower than the hardware blocksize.
	             On mounted filesystems however, read blocks
	             and physical blocks could be misaligned.
	             Smaller values lead to very thorough attempts to read
	             data at the edge of damaged areas,
	             but increase the strain on the damaged media.
	             Default: Blocksize as in -b
	-R <number> : At least that many read attempts are made on the first
	              bad block of a damaged area with minimum resolution.
	              More retries can sometimes recover a weak sector,
	              but at the cost of additional strain.
	              Default: 3
	-Z <number> : On each error, force seek the read head from start to
	              end of the source device as often as specified.
	              That takes time, creates additional strain and might
	              not be supported by all devices or drivers.
	              Default: 1
	-L <mode> : Use low level device calls as specified:
	                   0  Do not use low level device calls
	                   1  Attempt low level device calls
	                      for error recovery only
	                   2  Always use low level device calls
	                      if available
	            Supported low level features in this version are:
	                SYSTEM  DEVICE TYPE   FEATURE
	                Linux   cdrom/dvd     bus/device reset
	                Linux   cdrom         read sector in raw mode
	                Linux   floppy        controller reset, twaddle
	            Default: 1
	--sync : Use synchronized read calls (disable driver buffering)
	         Default: Asynchronous read buffering by the OS is allowed
	-s <blocks> : Start position where to start reading.
	              Will correspond to position 0 in the destination file.
	              Default: block 0
	-l <blocks> : Maximum length of data to be read.
	              Default: Entire size of input file
	-I <badblockfile> : Incremental mode. Assume the target file already
	                    exists and has holes specified in a badblockfile.
	                    It will be attempted to retrieve more data from
	                    the missing areas only.
	                    Default: none
	-i <bytes> : Blocksize to interpret the badblockfile given with -I.
	             Default: Blocksize as specified by -b
	-X <badblockfile> : Exclusion mode. Do not attempt to read blocks in
	                    badblockfile. If used together with -I,
	                    excluded blocks override included blocks.
	                    Default: none
	-x <bytes> : Blocksize to interpret the badblockfile given with -X.
	             Default: Blocksize as specified by -b
	-o <badblockfile> : Write a badblocks/e2fsck compatible bad block file.
	                    Default: none
	-S <seekscript> : Use external script for seeking in input file.
	                  (Might be useful for tape devices and similar).
	                  Seekscript must be an executable that takes the
	                  number of blocks to be skipped as argv1 (1-64)
	                  the blocksize in bytes as argv2
	                  and the current position (in bytes) as argv3.
	                  Return value needs to be the number of blocks
	                  successfully skipped, or 0 to indicate seek failure.
	                  The external seekscript will only be used
	                  if lseek() fails and we need to skip over data.
	                  Default: none
	-M <string> : Mark unrecovered data with this string instead of
	              skipping / zero-padding it. This helps in later
	              finding affected files on file system images
	              that couldn't be rescued completely.
	              Default: none
	-h | --help : Show this text

Description of output:
	. : Between 1 and 1024 blocks successfully read.
	_ : Read of block was incomplete. (possibly end of file)
	    The blocksize is now reduced to read the rest.
	|/| : Seek failed, source can only be read sequentially.
	> : Read failed, reducing blocksize to read partial data.
	! : A low level error on read attempt of smallest allowed size
	    leads to a retry attempt.
	[xx](+yy){ : Current block and number of bytes continuously
	             read successfully up to this point.
	X : Read failed on a block with minimum blocksize and is skipped.
	    Unrecoverable error, destination file is padded with zeros.
	    Data is now skipped until end of the unreadable area is reached.
	< : Successful read after the end of a bad area causes
	    backtracking with smaller blocksizes to search for the first
	    readable data.
	}[xx](+yy) : current block and number of bytes of recent
	             continuous unreadable data.

Copyright 2009, distributed under terms of the GPL

